JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the latest on
a human smuggling case in Texas
that has left at least 10 people
dead after they were packed into
a sweltering tractor-trailer.
And again to John Yang.
JOHN YANG: The truck
driver, James Bradley,
was charged in federal
court today with knowingly
transporting people who are in
the country illegally for money.
According to the criminal
complaint, a Wal-Mart
employee called police
early Sunday to report
the suspicious tractor-trailer
in the parking lot after
someone asked for water.
Officers found dozens
of people packed into
the sweltering trailer.
In addition to the
dead, nearly 20 others
are still hospitalized.
Bradley told police he was
driving the tractor-trailer
from Iowa to a new owner
in Brownsville, Texas,
and wasn't aware of what or who
he was hauling until he stopped
at the Wal-Mart for a bathroom
break.
Survivors said there was no
air conditioning and described
taking turns to breath through
a hole in the trailer.
Jason Buch is covering the
story and reports on border and
immigration issues for The San
Antonio Express-News.
Jason, thanks for joining us.
First, bring us up to date.
What's the latest today and
what did we learn from the truck
driver's appearance in court?
JASON BUCH, The San Antonio
Express-News: Well, there
wasn't a whole lot said in court
this morning.
He's going to be held until
a bond hearing on Thursday.
But the U.S. Attorney's Office
signed off on a complaint
by immigration agents that
detailed what they learned in
their interviews with the driver
and with the immigrants, and,
as you described, this journey
up from the border in an
overheated container with a very
limited ability to
get air from one hole.
JOHN YANG: And talk about
the charges he's facing.
They're federal charges.
What's the maximum penalty?
JASON BUCH: So, most smuggling
charges come with a maximum
penalty of 10 years in prison.
But because people died
in this case, he actually
faces up to life in prison
or the death penalty.
We had another incident here
about 15 years ago in which
several people died, 19 people
died after being
abandoned in a trailer.
The death penalty was
overturned in that case, and
that driver got 34 years.
So, it would be difficult for
the U.S. Attorney's Office to
prove up a capital case here.
JOHN YANG: How widespread are
these smuggling operations?
What can you tell us about them?
JASON BUCH: I mean, people
come across the border
in South Texas every day.
The Border Patrol in Laredo,
which is where these folks
crossed, have reported in the
last couple months an uptick in
people using tractor-trailers
to try to get through the
Border Patrol checkpoint and
reach the cities to the north.
It's been a long time
since we have had a
fatal incident like this
involving a tractor-trailer,
but certainly there have been
a number of incidents reported
by Border Patrol recently
of dozens of people packed
into tractor-trailers.
JOHN YANG: And tell us
how these operations work.
I mean, these people, some
of the survivors said they
crossed the river actually on a
raft and then they were
being taken farther
north in this truck?
How do they work in general?
JASON BUCH: Right.
So, what they described was
being -- paying a smuggler in
Mexico to bring them across
the border.
They were then brought
to most likely stash
houses on the U.S. side.
And then, when it was time to
load the truck, it appears that
people who were being smuggled
by different groups were
all brought to where
this trailer was parked,
loaded into the trailer,
and then driven to Laredo.
And, in fact, they were
given -- each group
was given a different
color tape to determine
who they should go with when
they arrived in San Antonio.
And some of the immigrants
described to investigators
that there were black
SUVs waiting for them
in the Wal-Mart parking
lot when they pulled up.
JOHN YANG: And where they
would be taken after that?
Where would these
SUVs take them?
JASON BUCH: Some people
said that they were
staying in San Antonio.
Others -- another person
interviewed by the
immigration agents said
that they were headed
for Minnesota.
Usually, San Antonio is a
pass-through because we're on
a major highway to the border.
People are usually going
on to major metropolitan
areas or regions of
the country that employ
a lot of immigrant laborers,
so, areas with large agriculture
industries or construction
booms.
JOHN YANG: And obviously,
business -- I'm sorry -- border
security, immigration issues
are a big topic, with
President Trump talking
about the border wall.
Has this incident
gotten swept up in the
politics of this issue?
JASON BUCH: Absolutely.
Our lieutenant governor was
on Facebook yesterday blaming
this on sanctuary cities.
Our legislature recently passed
a bill that would provide
criminal penalties and fines
for officials who ran what
they call sanctuary cities.
So, the lieutenant governor was
placing blame for this incident
on cities and counties that
don't cooperate with federal
immigration officials.
JOHN YANG: Well, it's a
horrible, horrible incident,
reminds us of the people behind
these issues.
Jason Buch, thanks so
much for joining us.
JASON BUCH: Thank you.